Blog post on potential issues while using renv (#154)
epiverse-trace/epiverse-trace.github.io: posts/renv-complications/index.qmd

---
title: "Things that can go wrong when using renv"
author:
  - name: "Hugo Gruson"
    orcid: "0000-0002-4094-1476"
date: "2023-09-26"
categories: [R, reproducibility, renv]
format:
  html: 
    toc: true
---

> We use the [renv R package](https://rstudio.github.io/renv/) to ensure reproducibility of the training materials and the pipelines we are providing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Throughout epiverse, we use the [`renv` R package](https://rstudio.github.io/renv/) to ensure reproducibility of the training materials and the pipelines we are providing.
```

Author: I'm sticking to the tidyverse guidelines for package names. Adding the amended suggestion to still take into account the updated phrasing

```suggestion
Throughout the Epiverse project, we use the [renv R package](https://rstudio.github.io/renv/) to ensure reproducibility of the training materials and the pipelines we are providing.
```

Reviewer: Today I learned! Thanks 😊

But we sometimes get reports from users who struggle to rebuild the environment and run the code.

> In this post, we dissect the source of these issues, explain why in reality renv is not at fault, and how this is caused by the inherent complexity of reproducibility. renv documentation already includes [caveats](https://rstudio.github.io/renv/articles/renv.html#caveats) explaining why some situations are bound to require more complex tools. This blog post reiterates some of these caveats and illustrates them with concrete examples.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this post, I dissect the source of these issues, explain why in reality `renv` is not at fault, and how this is caused by the inherent complexity of reproducibility. The `renv` documentation already includes [caveats](https://rstudio.github.io/renv/articles/renv.html#caveats) explaining why some situations are bound to require more complex tools. This blog post reiterates some of these caveats and illustrates them with concrete examples.
```

Author: Also sticking to "we" even in the case of a single author post, to match what we've been doing previously.

```suggestion
In this post, we dissect the source of these issues, explain why in reality renv is not at fault, and how this is caused by the inherent complexity of reproducibility. The renv documentation already includes [caveats](https://rstudio.github.io/renv/articles/renv.html#caveats) explaining why some situations are bound to require more complex tools. This blog post reiterates some of these caveats and illustrates them with concrete examples.
```

> We finish by mentioning a couple of more complete (but more complex!) frameworks that can overcome the issues presented here.
> We do not explore these alternative framework in details but we provide links to more information.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, I mention a couple of more complete (but more complex!) frameworks that can overcome the issues presented here.
I do not explore these alternative framework in detail but provide links to more information.
```

## Binaries vs building from source

> Software, including R packages, can generally be delivered in two forms: as binaries or as source code.
> If you are installing as source code, you may in some case need a compilation toolchain on your computer.
> If the toolchain is missing, it can lead to errors such as:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Software, including R packages, can generally be delivered in two forms: as binaries or as source code.
If you are building from the source code, you may in some case need a compilation toolchain on your computer.
If that toolchain is missing, it can lead to errors such as:
```

Consistency with the header, to prevent confusion.

> ```txt
> ld: warning: search path '/opt/gfortran/lib' not found
> ld: library 'gfortran' not found
> ```

Most of the time, regular users of R will not see these errors because they are installing binaries.
Indeed, CRAN provides pre-compiled binaries for Windows and macOS for the last version of the package and R.

With renv, you often want to install older versions of the packages, which won't be available as binaries from CRAN.
This means you are more likely to have to compile the package yourself and see this kind of errors, even though renv is not causing them.

## Beyond renv scope: incompatibility with system dependency versions

We [discussed previously the topic of system dependencies](../system-dependencies/), and [dependencies on specific R versions](https://blog.r-hub.io/2022/09/12/r-dependency/). These special dependencies can also be a source of headaches when using renv.

> The heart of the issue is that renv provides a simplified solution to reproducibility: it focuses on R packages and R package versions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The heart of the issue is that renv provides a simplified solution to reproducibility: it focuses on R packages and their versions.
```

In reference to my other comment on https://github.com/epiverse-trace/epiverse-trace.github.io/pull/154#discussion_r1466375927 - I think I read R versions here 😅

   59 |   if (sum > DOUBLE_XMAX) {
      |             ^~~~~~~~~~~
      |             DBL_MAX
mean2_lowlevel_template.h:59:13: note: each undeclared identifier is reported only once for each function it appears in
In file included from mean2_lowlevel.h:18,
                 from mean2.c:9:
mean2_lowlevel_template.h: In function ‘mean2_dbl’:
mean2_lowlevel_template.h:59:13: error: ‘DOUBLE_XMAX’ undeclared (first use in this function); did you mean ‘DBL_MAX’?
   59 |   if (sum > DOUBLE_XMAX) {
      |             ^~~~~~~~~~~
      |             DBL_MAX
make: *** [/usr/lib/R/etc/Makeconf:191: mean2.o] Error 1
ERROR: compilation failed for package ‘matrixStats’
```

</details>

The explanation for this error can be found in [the `matrixStats` release notes](https://github.com/HenrikBengtsson/matrixStats/blob/799669fc6de6f55a74cab06cc6a97634aa24ab0e/NEWS.md?plain=1#L111-L113), specifically the section for matrixStats 0.63.0:

> * Updated native code to use the C99 constant `DBL_MAX` instead of legacy S
constant `DOUBLE_XMAX`, which is planned to be unsupported in R (>= 4.2.0).

## Some solutions

> ### Larger binary store

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Alternative package managers
```
Suggesting this as it is a more practical solution, based on saving more binary versions.

We discussed how many issues when using renv can arise during the package compilation from source.
A potential solution would be to avoid this compilation step and always install pre-compiled binaries.

This is not possible while installing from CRAN as CRAN only provides binaries for recent versions of R and for a limited number of platforms.

But Posit for example provides a larger collection of binaries, for different package versions, and different platforms, via their Public [Posit Package Manager (PPM)](https://packagemanager.posit.co/).

Making sure you install from PPM rather than CRAN can be a first simple step to make some of the issues discussed here vanish.

> ### Extended reproducibility

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Extending the scope of reproducibility
```

Slight adjustment to link back to the `renv scope` header from before.

Another solution could be to add more complex reproducibility solutions that go beyond the scope of renv.

#### renv with rig

> The R version is specified in `renv.lock` and to avoid incompatibility of older package versions with newer versions of R, you could run the declared R version.

Reviewer: Didn't the post mention `renv` manages package versions and the R version? If so, it may leave the reader confused as to what `rig` really adds. Might it help to clarify the difference?

Author: > Didn't the post mention renv manages package versions and the R version?

If some part of the post suggested this, it should be updated. The R version number will be recorded in renv but as an R package itself, renv cannot use this info. It can only manage the version of R packages.

Do you have suggestions on how & where to clarify this?

Reviewer: I misread I see now. I will leave a comment where I misread for your reference.

This can be achieved with various means but a convenient solution is the [rig](https://github.com/r-lib/rig) tool.

There are even some [discussions](https://github.com/r-lib/rig/issues/131) to integrate rig and renv more tightly and let rig detect automatically which R version to use based on the `renv.lock` file.

#### Docker, Nix and others

> Alternatively, you could use other reproducibility toolkit that focus not just on the R package versions, but on the entire software stack.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Alternatively, you could use other reproducibility toolkits that focus not just on the R package versions, but on the entire software stack (e.g., including the operating system, the system dependencies).
```
